[Music]
karl popper wrote depending upon how you
count things
something like 11 substantial books and
this is not to mention his many other
works like philosophy articles and
separate essays
that he also wrote or is at least
credited with some works being compiled
edited and published after his death
popper is renowned by many but not
enough
and denounced by some which are too many
for his clarity of thought and his
criticism of many ideologies and other
philosophies
it is this clear-sighted criticism of
various deeply entrenched philosophies
in academia
that could be one reason why he is not
so popular in universities as he should
be
or where he is not ignored completely
his contributions can
sometimes be minimized we could of
course spend many hours extolling his
philosophies
and summarizing his ideas but the task
i've set myself here and now
is to reveal to you what i think are
some central points of his epistemology
that inform his broader philosophy there
are four insights i wish to begin with
all related
and all of which feed into the work of
his intellectual successor
david deutsch one popper's epistemology
concentrates upon making progress and
improving the human condition
through improving our ideas by revealing
what is wrong with existing structures
rather than showing any of them to be
right or justified
this is a key insight and we may quibble
over whether others got there first in
the ancient greek tradition or elsewhere
but karl popper really did systematize
and argue for this negative view in
epistemology
in science he famously observed that
should an idea not be testable
then it was not science this is known as
the falsification criterion
he never argued we must emphasize that
unfalsifiable theories are worthless
quite the opposite for his own
philosophy was not testable
scientifically
but rather that the traditional game of
assuming that knowledge was either
deduced from axioms already known
or assumed true or induced by repeated
observations in the world
was wrong science is distinguished by
testability
the capacity for a theory or hypothesis
to be falsified
shown wrong refuted and thus ruled out
in favour of some better idea
and this leads to the related idea of to
we are simply looking for the best idea
the idea that
solves our problem our project whether
in science or morality or history is not
defined at the provably true idea
we are seeking instead to some extent
the fittest idea for a problem situation
at any given time
popper's great work objective knowledge
is subtitled
an evolutionary approach for good reason
once we find a solution to our problem
we do not assume the solution will work
for all time
our situation may change and our ideas
will need to adapt
this does resemble something of how
biological organisms are fit
given a particular environment but
should the environment change
and the organism fail to adapt to be
precise the genes fail to be replicated
then it will die and so too with ideas
they are the best we have at the time
not the ultimate truth
we should reject claims to ultimate
final truth
not least because those who do make such
claims are often at loggerheads
which brings me to three there is always
a
third way false dichotomies lurk
everywhere
and of course the concept of a false
dichotomy the idea that only this
all that is possible was known even to
the ancients
but what karl popper did was have a
strong theme running deeply through his
works
that revealed how often we are presented
with false dichotomies
and what was needed instead was a third
way a better way
if so-called induction could not produce
certain knowledge in science
then how could we be confident of
scientific discoveries
either we have certainty or we lack
confidence
popper rejected this false dichotomy and
completely
upended the idea that we should seek
certainty or justifications for our
theories
and instead concentrated upon how it is
that we make progress instead
by a critical means by ruling out
falsehoods
in democratic systems given that the
majority might form a mob
should we therefore install a kindly
philosopher as a tyrant
who should rule majorities or kings
papa rejected that whole false dichotomy
there is a third way
democracy is about how to remove rulers
not answering
who should rule and so this leads us to
four papa's anti-authority stance
and although this may be controversial i
admit i am speaking for myself when
reading
for example his own intellectual
autobiography unended quest
a deep theme is a rejection of authority
on many fronts
the supposed authority of empiricism
namely that nature tells you what is
true
that the knowledge is there to be read
from the book of reality
this is rejected the idea that
scientists themselves are also
authorities in whom we should place our
trust
or whose theories we should believe or
that governments are there to act as
all-knowing rulers
now the proper stance is to be skeptical
whenever authority is claimed
the question is by what mechanism can
you know
a scientist should not be believed but
questioned
and when the questions are answered well
then society should act
not because of any authority of the
scientists but because
objectively the knowledge they claim
solves our problem
and that is an objective matter which
makes papa a realist and a defender of
truth
karl popper's philosophy stands as an
objective realistic
bull walk between two terrible
tyrannical alternative epistemologies
on the one hand relativism the rejection
of reality and truth and objectivity
and on the other dogmatism the embracing
of a revealed truth or a final truth
the third way that papa marks out for us
allows for continual
rapid improvement but for more on this
we have to go to the next part
of this series about david deutch's
advances
on papa